Overview 
 - Our project aims to discover whether there are endothelial cell populations that produce stem cell maintenance factors in different murine tissues. We also aim to explore whether the factors produced by endothelial cells in different tissues are linked to the characteristics of the stem cell niches they may be supporting.  

- This repository contains datasets, scripts, and figures that will help us achieve these aims. 

- Currently, the dataset contained in the repository is a CSV file with single cell RNA sequencing data from a sample of murine small intestine endothelial cells. In the future, additional CSV files with single cell RNA sequencing data from samples of endothelial cells from other murine tissues will be added to the repository.

- Currently, the script contained in the repository is an R script that uses the Seurat library to analyze the murine small intestine endothelial cell single cell RNA sequencing data. The script loads the data file, creates a Seurat Object, normalizes the data, performs PCA, visualizes the dimensions of the data, clusters the cells in the data, visualizes the cell clusters, identifies differentially expressed features for each cluster, and visualizes the expression of a few stem cell supporting factors in the clusters. In the future, additional R scripts that analyze the single cell RNA sequencing data from other murine tissue endothelial cell samples will be added to the repository. The scripts for analyzing the data from different tissues will differ in their data file inputs, number of relevant principal components, number of clusters, cluster markers and labels, and plot outputs. 

- Currently, the figures contained in the repository are PDF files that are outputted by the R script described above. These figures include a heatmap and elbow plot that illustrate how many prinicipal components are needed for downstream analyses. These figures also include a plot of the cell clusters and a plot that shows how much certain stem cell supporting factors are expressed by each of the clusters. In the future, additional PDF files will be added to the repository corresponding to the results obtained by analyzing the data from the other murine tissue endothelial cell samples. 


- Reference for R script lines 9-82: Satija, Rahul. “Guided Clustering of the Microwell-Seq Mouse Cell Atlas.” SATIJA LAB, 24 June 2019, satijalab.org/seurat/v3.0/mca.html.

- Reference for R script lines 95-109: Satija, Rahul. “Seurat - Guided Clustering Tutorial.” SATIJA LAB, 4 March 2020, satijalab.org/seurat/v3.1/pbmc3k_tutorial.html.



Data 
- The dataset is contained in a CSV file called "Small_Intestine_Data.csv" in the "data" folder. The dataset contains single cell RNA sequencing data obtained from healthy murine small intestine endothelial cells. There are 974 cells in this dataset. These cells were assessed for their expression of 11174 genes. The file is an expression matrix that provides the expression level of each gene in each cell sequenced. 

- In the future, additional datasets will be added to the "data" folder and also will contain single cell RNA sequencing data obtained from healthy murine endothelial cells but from tissues other than the small intestine. 

- The script calls the data file directly to load the data into R to perform the necessary analyses. 


- Website where dataset is available for download: https://endotheliomics.shinyapps.io/ec_atlas/

- Article that describes the dataset: Kalucka, Joanna, et al. "Single-Cell Transcriptome Atlas of Murine Endothelial Cells." Cell, vol. 180, no. 4, Feb. 2020, pp. 764-779, Elsevier Inc., doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.01.015. Accessed 28 Mar. 2020. 



Folder Structure 
- code: contains R scripts to run to analyze data and create plots

- data: contains CSV files with single cell RNA sequencing expression matrices for samples of endothelial cells from different murine tissues

- plots: contains figures generated by the R scripts that visualize data and help in their analysis 



Installation 
- To run the code, the user must be able to access R and/or R Studio. R-3.6.2 and RStudio Version 1.2.5033 were used to write and test the script in the repository. The script can easily be run in RStudio by opening the script, selecting all the text in the file, and pressing the "Run the current line or selection" button. If necessary, the script may also be run from the command line using the command "Rscript Small_Intestine_Script.R". It is important that the user changes the file input and output paths in the script before running it to ensure the necessary data files can be accessed and the plots saved. The code attaches the packages necessary to complete the analyses, so the user does not need to install them manually. These packages are Seurat and ggplot2. 

